---
layout: post
title: Go in 42 lines of Ruby
published: true
author: Julien Letessier
author_role: Software Engineer
author_url: http://github.com/mezis
author_avatar: http://www.gravatar.com/avatar/88683f31bdf05a8071fb08327b3919cb
summary: |
  Go's Goroutines are like sugar. They give me a rush, and my IO-bound work as
  well!

  But for a one-off script, my Go's not fluent enough, so why not bring some of
  it to Ruby?

  Read on for a no-frills approach to `go { do_stuff }`.
---

> Go's Goroutines are like sugar. They give me a rush, and my IO-bound work as
> well!

> But for a one-off script, my Go's not fluent enough, so why not bring some of
> it to Ruby?

I'm writing a script that scrapes a slow API pretty intensely.
The naive approach would have me do this:

{% highlight ruby %}
things_ids.each do |thing_id|
  data = HttpClient.get("http://example.com/things/#{thing_id}")
  save_to_file(data)
end
{% endhighlight %}

... but I have 3,000 things to get, the API takes 1 second per call, and I'm not
that patient.

(For the record, the API in question is Pivotal Tracker's)

So what I'd really like to do is something like:

{% highlight ruby %}
things_ids.each do |thing_id|
  go do
    data = HttpClient.get("http://example.com/things/#{thing_id}")
    save_to_file(data)
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

and have it magically parallelize my `go` block.

Sure, I could use Celluloid's [beautiful
futures](https://github.com/celluloid/celluloid/wiki/Futures), or Faraday's
[parallelism
support](https://github.com/lostisland/faraday/wiki/Parallel-requests), but
today I have a moment to tinker under the hood.

All I really need is a pool of threads, futures, and some syntax sugar:

{% highlight ruby %}
class Pool
  def initialize(max_size = nil)
    @threads = []
    @lock    = Monitor.new
    @signal  = ConditionVariable.new(@lock)
    @max_size = max_size
  end

  def go(&block)
    @lock.synchronize do
      @signal.wait while !available?
      @threads << Thread.new do
        Thread.current.abort_on_exception = true

        begin
          value = block.call
        ensure
          release Thread.current
        end
        value
      end
      return @threads.last
    end
  end

  private

  def release(thread)
    @lock.synchronize do
      @threads.delete thread
      @signal.broadcast
    end
  end

  def available?
    @max_size.nil? || @threads.length < @max_size
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}


Our pool just has one `go` method. Pass it a block, and it will spawn a thread
to do your work (possibly waiting on the pool to have a free slot).

`abort_on_exception` makes sure that if one of your "goroutines" bursts into
flames, you're told (as opposed to the default of failing silently).

The `@lock` / `@signal` dance keeps your pool size under control;
specifically the `@signal` will wake up waiting for a slot in the pool whenever
one becomes available.

Threads in Ruby can be used as promises/futures, and the `go` method returns a
thread object (leaky API, but bear with me):

{% highlight ruby %}
go { :hello }.value
#=> :hello
{% endhighlight %}


## The shiny

I almost forgot the syntax sugar that lets you say `go` in your
[favourite](https://github.com/pry/pry) Ruby REPL:


{% highlight ruby %}
def Kernel.go(&block)
  ($pool ||= Pool.new).go(&block)
end
{% endhighlight %}

Adding the `go` method directly on `Kernel` means it'll be globally available
abolutely everywhere in your VM.
Probably the best idea, but hey, Ruby lets you do it!


## Caveat emptor

There are a few major caveats here, so please don't do the above in production code.
Experts have built better libraries for this, this is for educational purposes, don't
say you weren't warned:

- Threaded code is bloody hard to integration test, as is everything with
  threads and parallelism.
- If you limit the pool size, you'll get deadlocks rapidly unless you very
  carefully think about what you're spawning.
- If you don't, your machine may or may not catch fire (or in my case, your API
  token may well get banned!)


## Threads v processes

At HouseTrip, we generally avoid the use of threading for _scaling_ purposes,
and follow the Unix Way (and, incidentally, the [12
factor](http://12factor.net/concurrency) way) of scaling out through the process
model.

But cases exist where concurrency (not scaling) is useful. The example I've used
(alling on a bunch of external resources and processing the results) is a
typical one. Another classic, which will sound more familiar to web engineers,
is firing database queries "in parallel" before rendering your views.

To elaborate: in this concurrency example you want the "threads" to interact, so
they can for instance share/reuse HTTP connections, and then provide an
aggregate result.

In a "scaling out with threads" example, examples, the threads interact (you
don-t have a choice—the memory and object space is shared) but it's actually a
_problem_ as one thread has the ability to corrupt  or disrupt all others.


## Tools of the thread

Here's some pointers to get you started, should you want to leverage concurrency
in your Ruby VM:

- Ilya Grigorik has built [agent](https://github.com/igrigorik/agent/), a much
  more elaborate (and tested) version of the above.
- Another classic library, offering the Actor model in a more traditional OO
  fashion, is [Celluloid](http://celluloid.io/).
- For a different approach to the same problem, check out
  [async/await](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/14455293/async-and-await) in
  .NET 4.5. Always good to see how the other side does it.


That's all, go have fun with threads now!
